Docs: Location Provider Documentation (#1537)
apache/iceberg-python: mkdocs/docs/configuration.md

| `write.parquet.row-group-limit`          | Number of rows                    | 1048576 | The upper bound of the number of entries within a single row group                                                                  |
| `write.parquet.page-size-bytes`          | Size in bytes                     | 1MB     | Set a target threshold for the approximate encoded size of data pages within a column chunk                                         |
| `write.parquet.page-row-limit`           | Number of rows                    | 20000   | Set a target threshold for the maximum number of rows within a column chunk                                                         |
| `write.parquet.dict-size-bytes`          | Size in bytes                     | 2MB     | Set the dictionary page size limit per row group                                                                                    |
| `write.metadata.previous-versions-max`   | Integer                           | 100     | The max number of previous version metadata files to keep before deleting after commit.                                             |

> | `write.object-storage.enabled`           | Boolean                           | True    | Enables the [ObjectStoreLocationProvider](configuration.md#objectstorelocationprovider) that adds a hash component to file paths    |

Author: (Same wording, more or less, as https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration/#write-properties)

Reviewer: maybe we should add a warning or something about how this default differs from the java implementation

> | `write.object-storage.partitioned-paths` | Boolean                           | True    | Controls whether [partition values are included in file paths](configuration.md#partition-exclusion) when object storage is enabled |

Reviewer: hyperlinks are weird sometimes, can you make sure that these work as intended

Author: I've checked all hyperlinks on the current version and they work as intended

> | `write.py-location-provider.impl`        | String of form `module.ClassName` | null    | Optional, [custom LocationProvider](configuration.md#loading-a-custom-locationprovider) implementation                              |

Author: Unsure about what `Options` to put here. Happy to take suggestions.

Reviewer: maybe similar to the custom catalog 
https://py.iceberg.apache.org/configuration/#custom-catalog-implementations

Author: <img width="1428" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ff4a70f9-ad5d-4d78-a665-5bd7b6283c7c" />
 
Don't love how this looks. I prefer what it is now:

<img width="1428" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d1789914-b8d6-449d-8700-4ebee432f5ef" />

I've changed the section linked above to [have `mymodule.MyLocationProvider`](`mymodule.MyLocationProvider`) in custom Catalog style. WDYT?

Author: (The above screenshot also shows how code/backticks hyperlinks look, I think they're fine. This is now relevant because of https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/pull/1537#discussion_r1921652049.

<!-- markdown-link-check-enable-->

## Location Providers

Iceberg works with the concept of a LocationProvider that determines the file paths for a table's data. PyIceberg
introduces a pluggable LocationProvider module; the LocationProvider used may be specified on a per-table basis via
table properties. PyIceberg defaults to the [ObjectStoreLocationProvider](configuration.md#objectstorelocationprovider),

> which generates file paths that are optimised for object storage.

Author: Spelling note: I write "optimise" / "optimisation" throughout. Happy to change if American spelling is preferred.

Author: (I've made this change)

### SimpleLocationProvider

> The SimpleLocationProvider places file names underneath a `data` directory in the table's storage location. For example,

Author: I realised I was wrong in https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/issues/1510#issuecomment-2585322771 about docs not needing to change when `write.data.path` is supported. I think we *do* want to say that data files are under a `data` directory, here and below.

But I think this is fine because the change will be small - it'd just be "`write.data.path`" instead of "`data` directory under the table's location" throughout. `write.data.path` [defaults to this](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration/#write-properties).

a non-partitioned table might have a data file with location:

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/0000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

When data is partitioned, the files under a given partition are grouped into a subdirectory, with that partition key
and value as the directory name. For example, a table partitioned over a string column `category` might have a data file
with location:

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/category=orders/0000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

The SimpleLocationProvider is enabled for a table by explicitly setting its `write.object-storage.enabled` table property to `false`.

> ### ObjectStoreLocationProvider

Author: There's a lot of natural duplication between this section and https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/aws/#object-store-file-layout. I've gone less in-depth here though.

I was unsure whether to link to this webpage (and if so, how to word it) because there's a lot that's not relevant to us, e.g.

> Note, the path resolution logic for ObjectStoreLocationProvider is write.data.path then <tableLocation>/data. However, for the older versions up to 0.12.0, the logic is as follows: - before 0.12.0, write.object-storage.path must be set. - at 0.12.0, write.object-storage.path then write.folder-storage.path then <tableLocation>/data.

and 

> Previously provided base64 hash was updated to base2 in order to provide an improved auto-scaling behavior on S3 General Purpose Buckets.

Reviewer: i think we should link to that for additional context

When several files are stored under the same prefix, cloud object stores such as S3 often [throttling requests on prefixes](https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/http-5xx-errors-s3),
resulting in slowdowns.

The ObjectStoreLocationProvider counteracts this by injecting deterministic hashes, in the form of binary directories,
into file paths, to distribute files across a larger number of object store prefixes.

> Paths contain partitions just before the file name, and a `data` directory beneath the table's location, in a similar

Author: See https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/pull/1537#discussion_r1921100230 re `data` here.

manner to the [SimpleLocationProvider](configuration.md#simplelocationprovider). For example, a table partitioned over a string
column `category` might have a data file with location: (note the additional binary directories)

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/0101/0110/1001/10110010/category=orders/0000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

The `write.object-storage.enabled` table property determines whether the ObjectStoreLocationProvider is enabled for a
table. It is used by default.

#### Partition Exclusion

When the ObjectStoreLocationProvider is used, the table property `write.object-storage.partitioned-paths`, which
defaults to `true`, can be set to `false` as an additional optimisation for object stores. This omits partition keys and values from data
file paths *entirely* to further reduce key size. With it disabled, the same data file above would instead be written
to: (note the absence of `category=orders`)

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/1101/0100/1011/00111010-00000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

> ### Loading a Custom LocationProvider

Author: Similar to https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/custom-catalog/#custom-location-provider-implementation

Similar to FileIO, a custom LocationProvider may be provided for a table by concretely subclassing the abstract base

> class [LocationProvider](../reference/pyiceberg/table/locations/#pyiceberg.table.locations.LocationProvider). The

Author: I wanted to link to [this](https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/pull/1537/files#r1921101125), and this works for me locally, but I get the following warning when serving docs locally:

```
INFO - Doc file 'configuration md' contains an unrecognized relative link '.. / reference/pyiceberg/table/locations/#pyiceberg.table.locations.LocationProvider', it was left as is. Did you mean ' reference/pyiceberg/table/locations.md#pyiceberg.table.locations.LocationProvider'?
```

But I get a similar warning elsewhere: `Doc file 'SUMMARY.md' contains an unrecognized relative link 'reference/', it was left as is.`. So maybe this is fine.

Reviewer: yea i think its fine, as long as the hyperlink works when you run it locally

table property `write.py-location-provider.impl` should be set to the fully-qualified name of the custom
LocationProvider (i.e. `module.CustomLocationProvider`). Recall that a LocationProvider is configured per-table,
permitting different location provision for different tables.

An example, custom `LocationProvider` implementation is shown below.

```py

> import uuid

Author: I've only shown this import for conciseness.

<!-- markdown-link-check-enable-->

## Location Providers

> Iceberg works with the concept of a LocationProvider that determines file paths for a table's data. PyIceberg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Iceberg uses the concept of a `LocationProvider` to manage file paths for a table's data. In PyIceberg, the `LocationProvider` module is designed to be pluggable, allowing customization for specific use cases. The `LocationProvider` for a table can be specified through table properties.

PyIceberg defaults to the [ObjectStoreLocationProvider](configuration.md#objectstorelocationprovider),
which generates file paths that are optimized for object storage
```

Author: I've changed to backticks around `LocationProvider` and its implementations throughout. I keep them as Location Provider (e.g. Object Store Location Provider, without backticks) in section headings though for readability (to not have code-like terms in headings).

introduces a pluggable LocationProvider module; the LocationProvider used may be specified on a per-table basis via
table properties. PyIceberg defaults to the [ObjectStoreLocationProvider](configuration.md#objectstorelocationprovider),
which generates file paths that are optimized for object storage.

### SimpleLocationProvider

> The SimpleLocationProvider places file names underneath a `data` directory in the table's storage location. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SimpleLocationProvider` places a table's data file names underneath a `data` directory in the table's storage location. For example,
```

Reviewer: I think we should also call out that the "base location" is the `table.metadata.location` 

From the spec, https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#table-metadata-fields

> The table's base location. This is used by writers to determine where to store data files, manifest files, and table metadata files.

a non-partitioned table might have a data file with location:

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/0000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

> When data is partitioned, files under a given partition are grouped into a subdirectory, with that partition key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the table is partitioned, files under a given partition are grouped into a subdirectory, with that partition key
```

Reviewer: nit: maybe also when the `hive-style` partition path

Author: Hopefully [this](https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/pull/1537/commits/76f397b35abaa1555ede59ad5c5a4fce8c5f1374#diff-497e037708cc64870c6ba9372f6064a69ca1e74d65d6195dcee5a44851e8b47dR221) and [this](https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/pull/1537/commits/76f397b35abaa1555ede59ad5c5a4fce8c5f1374#diff-497e037708cc64870c6ba9372f6064a69ca1e74d65d6195dcee5a44851e8b47dR241) is wha you meant

and value as the directory name. For example, a table partitioned over a string column `category` might have a data file
with location:

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/category=orders/0000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

The SimpleLocationProvider is enabled for a table by explicitly setting its `write.object-storage.enabled` table
property to `False`.

### ObjectStoreLocationProvider

When several files are stored under the same prefix, cloud object stores such as S3 often [throttle requests on prefixes](https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/http-5xx-errors-s3),
resulting in slowdowns.

The ObjectStoreLocationProvider counteracts this by injecting deterministic hashes, in the form of binary directories,
into file paths, to distribute files across a larger number of object store prefixes.

> Paths contain partitions just before the file name and a `data` directory beneath the table's location, in a similar

Author: See https://github.com/apache/iceberg-python/pull/1537#discussion_r1921100230 re `data` here.

manner to the [SimpleLocationProvider](configuration.md#simplelocationprovider). For example, a table partitioned over a string
column `category` might have a data file with location: (note the additional binary directories)

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/0101/0110/1001/10110010/category=orders/0000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet
```

The `write.object-storage.enabled` table property determines whether the ObjectStoreLocationProvider is enabled for a
table. It is used by default.

#### Partition Exclusion

When the ObjectStoreLocationProvider is used, the table property `write.object-storage.partitioned-paths`, which
defaults to `True`, can be set to `False` as an additional optimization for object stores. This omits partition keys and
values from data file paths *entirely* to further reduce key size. With it disabled, the same data file above would
instead be written to: (note the absence of `category=orders`)

```txt
s3://bucket/ns/table/data/1101/0100/1011/00111010-00000-0-5affc076-96a4-48f2-9cd2-d5efbc9f0c94-00001.parquet

> ```

Reviewer: nit: what about giving an example of this set to True and another one set to False

Author: I have the False case just above ("the same data file above" here) - or do you mean making that more explicit?

Reviewer: i think given the new wording above, its clear now :) thanks!

### Loading a Custom LocationProvider

Similar to FileIO, a custom LocationProvider may be provided for a table by concretely subclassing the abstract base
class [LocationProvider](../reference/pyiceberg/table/locations/#pyiceberg.table.locations.LocationProvider). The
table property `write.py-location-provider.impl` should be set to the fully-qualified name of the custom
LocationProvider (i.e. `module.CustomLocationProvider`). Recall that a LocationProvider is configured per-table,

> permitting different location provision for different tables.

Reviewer: also mention that java uses `write.location-provider.impl`
